From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily.
Over the weekend, the United States
military pulled off a stunning rescue
behind enemy lines in Iran.
The mission to save an injured airman
was as complicated as it was daring.
Today, my colleague Eric Schmitt
explains how the US pulled it off
and why this victory may be short-lived.
It's Tuesday, April 7th.
Eric Schmitt, welcome back to The Daily.
Thank you. So, over the weekend, the
administration pulls off this operation
that seems like it could have been
ripped from a Hollywood movie, right?
And we're going to get to the details of
it, but before we do, Eric, just set the
stage for us and tell us what was
happening in the war in the days leading
up to this rescue mission.
Sure. So, by Friday it was the end of
the fifth week of the air campaign that
Israel and the United States was waging
against Iran. In retaliation, Iran had
closed the Strait of Hormuz. That sent
gasoline prices here in the US
skyrocketing and economic reverberations
across the globe.
And in the polls, the war was also
unpopular, but the administration was
trying to sell the point that they were
winning. This was a successful military
campaign and that the United States had
actually achieved air dominance over
Iran. Meaning that they controlled the
airspace over Iran. That's what our
military was saying. That's right. And
then early Friday, we got the news that
an American war plane had actually been
shot down over Iran. The first time that
had happened in the in the war.
And so, this was a real jolt that wait a
minute, you know, we've been hearing
from the administration that
everything's the know, States has such
control over the skies that they can fly
just about any mission and suddenly we
hear about this F-15E Strike Eagle plane
getting shot down.
And what was the plane doing in Iranian
airspace to begin with?
So, we don't know exactly what its
mission was, but most likely it was
carrying out a mission to strike one of
these many military targets. It's a
heavy-duty bomber, drops bombs 2,000 lbs
or more on targets. And so, it's been
one of the world workhorses of this
campaign.
And who was in the plane, Eric?
So, the F-15E is a two-seat plane. You
have a pilot in the front and then the
officer behind him is called a weapons
systems officer. These are both Air
Force pilots, fairly experienced. So,
early Friday morning over Iran, this
F-15E gets hit and they immediately
eject from the plane. The first thing
that happens in an ejection is the
canopy of their plane pops off. They
then eject one after the other, but it's
a few seconds apart. So, when they
parachute down, they could be miles
apart. They don't land in necessarily
the same place. The winds could be
different. There's all sorts of
variables that make it difficult to
determine exactly where they land.
So, once this happens, the military is
immediately alerted that there's a
problem on the ground and they go into
search and rescue mode.
Now, these aviators are wearing special
vests in their flight suits that have
communications on them. They have a
special beacon they can use to signal
their location. And within about 6
hours, the pilot is scooped up, you
know, by search and rescue teams. This
came under fire, but they were able to
get him out of Iranian territory and
back to Kuwait. And the other guy
though, at this point, what does the
military know about him? So, the problem
with the weapons systems officer was
hours went by and they had no contact
with him.
>> don't know if he's injured. They don't
know if he's dead. They don't know he's
captured, they don't know anything.
Exactly. And they're worried about that.
But, this is how pilots are trained.
They want to get to someplace safe and
someplace where they can communicate
their position without being detected.
What we now know is that he climbed this
7,000 ft ridgeline. Even though he's
injured.
>> 7,000 ft?
>> Yeah. He's scrambling up, you know, this
rugged mountain space. And this is in
southwestern Iran. Again, it's now in
daytime.
And he is scrambling up, but he's also
conscious that he doesn't want to be
seen or detected. So, he eventually
makes it up to the top, even though he's
kind of bloodied and injured, he makes
it up to the top of this ridgeline. He
finds a crevice to hide in. Wow. So,
meanwhile, the military still doesn't
know where he is. And they enlist the
CIA to help them. The CIA has all sorts
of super-duper technology, including
some, it seems to be possibly very
secret surveillance drones that would
help them locate the aviator where he
may be. And sure enough, they do.
And they pass along that location to the
Pentagon.
And right about the same time, the
aviator who's been in his mountain
hideout, he surfaces to communicate on
his beacon. Think of it as a super-duper
beeper that'll communicate a signal, an
encrypted signal, to the Americans
looking for him.
Okay, so at this point in time, Eric,
obviously, this airman is trying to
evade capture by the Iranians. But, can
you just explain the stakes of that a
little bit?
So, the stakes are huge for both sides.
For the US, they're following through on
their credo to leave no service member
behind, and they'll basically pull out
all the stops to do it. For the
Iranians, however, this would be a huge
propaganda coup if they can capture an
American airman and bring him back to
Tehran and parade him in front of the
cameras, here would be another way that
they could push back by saying, "We've
got one of your service members and
we're going to use him in leverage with
whatever bargaining we go forward with."
And this mattered so much that the
Iranian regime put a huge bounty out for
anybody who could help locate the
airman. By some accounts, it was much as
$60,000
for people who they could turn in
information to the Iranian forces who
are searching for him now. So, it
basically sounds like this is a race
against time at this point. The airman
knows that he has to evade capture, the
Iranians know that the US is probably
looking for him, and the US probably
knows that the Iranians are trying to
grab him, right? That's right. So, both
sides kind of marshal their resources.
The Iranians send out multiple search
parties looking for this guy. Again,
they've offered this bounty, so
everybody's on the lookout for some kind
of American airman in a, you know, or a
parachute or any signs of life from
where this guy is. On the other hand,
the Americans, they mount this massive
operation. Dozens of aircraft, they get
SEAL Team Six and other special
operations guys mustered. They got to
try and get in, locate this guy, and get
him out before the Iranians on the
ground can reach him.
And so, they come up with a deception
plan because they're trying to buy time
for this military search and rescue
force to get there on the scene. So
again, the CIA comes back into this
picture here, and they basically start
putting out word covertly that they've
already recovered this guy, and he's
over here, miles and miles away from the
actual location what they're doing.
The whole objective here is to confuse
the Iranians on the ground to think, you
know, "Where is this guy? Is he over
here? Is he over there? We see bombings
happening all over the place. We hear
these messages that are fake messages
saying, you know, the Americans have got
this guy. He's coming out by the
coastline. No, no, he's over at this
mountain line." It's all to buy time for
this big rescue force that that knows
where the guy is hiding. They just have
to get there in time to grab him.
So, the United States sends in under the
cloak of darkness these two C-130 cargo
planes that are specially made to land
in austere land airstrips. And inside
the aircraft are several small
helicopters. Cuz remember, this guy's up
up on top of a 7,000-ft mountain. They
don't have time to hike up there, and
they can't land anything in that. So,
they have to get a special helicopter
that's small enough to get to this area
and fly up.
So, off they go up the mountain, and
sure enough, the aviator is there. He's
waiting for them. They come in, their
guns are firing to keep anybody else
away. They pick him up, and it looks
like this amazing drama that's now gone
on for over 24 hours may finally be
over. I'm actually getting texts from
sources saying, "We've got him. He's
safe. He's recovered." And we're about
to publish our story when somebody else
says, "Whoa, wait a minute. There's a
problem. There's a serious problem."
The problem is, as these C-130 planes
are maneuvering to try and take off
again, getting it They've gotten all the
helicopters back in, everything's ready
to go, the nose gear gets stuck in this
kind of sandy, dirty soil. It's
apparently kind of wet as well. And so,
they can't move it. So, after all of
this, these planes are stuck in the mud,
essentially. Stuck in this dirt.
>> stuck. They can't take off.
>> stuck. They can't move it. They're
trying to figure out Finally, they just
say, "We can't do this. We have to go to
plan B."
And in this case, it means they're going
to send three new planes, different
planes, into
basically get the commando team as well
as the downed airman. And so, this means
that the Americans have to buy
themselves more time. And what they do
until these new aircraft can arrive is
they basically create a ring of fire
around this airbase where they're
basically blasting away from
high-altitude bombers anybody that gets
near it. So, the replacement planes
finally arrive. They were able to load
up the commandos, get the airmen on
board, and off they go. 1 2 3 in
succession. One plane takes off, and
about 15 minutes the next plane takes
off, and finally the third plane takes
off. The last thing they do, the
military does, is they have to destroy
these aircraft that they originally flew
in on. The ones that got stuck in the
sand, the helicopters that came with
them. Because they've got all this
sensitive technology on them that they
don't want to fall into Iranian hands.
So, this is kind of the irony of all
this. At the end of the mission, they
actually bombed the planes that were
helping to rescue. But, by now
the three aircraft are airborne and
they're on their way to Kuwait. The
airman is being treated aboard, and soon
he and the pilot who they've obviously
been treating will be on flights to
Germany in a medical hospital there.
So, the successful rescue gave President
Trump a huge victory, which he touted at
a Monday press conference at the White
House.
>> And we're here today to celebrate the
success of one of the largest, most
complex, most harrowing combat searches,
I guess you would call it a search and
rescue mission,
ever attempted by the military.
Where he praised the military. He
praised the CIA. So, in a
breathtaking show of skill and
precision, lethality, and force,
America's military descended on the
area. Talking about only the American
military could have pulled off such an
amazing rescue operation. Rescued the
stranded officer, destroyed all threats,
and exited Iranian territory while
taking no casualties of any kind.
But, despite this,
this still leaves a very unpopular war
that's created all kinds of economic
consequences around the world and
obviously in the United States. And it
still leaves many of the president's
strategic goals unfinished.
We'll be right back.
So Eric, the United States and the Trump
administration are obviously touting
this rescue operation as a huge victory.
How are the Iranians viewing it?
Well, the Iranians are also touting it
as a big victory for different reasons,
of course. They were successful in
shooting down the first American combat
plane. No doubt about that. They also
basically demonstrate that the Americans
don't fully control the airspace as
Secretary Hagseth has talked about this
air dominance, that they're still able
to launch ballistic missiles and drones.
And in fact, some of our other reporting
has indicated that the Iranians are
still able to fire off about 15 to 30
ballistic missiles every day, as well as
50 to 100 drones, one-way attack drones.
So they still have significant
capability, whether it's to fire at
American warplanes or to fire at energy
infrastructure around the neighboring
Gulf countries. It's still a significant
problem, and thus it shows the Iranians
still have some will to fight and some
capability to fight.
Given all of that, what does it tell us
about what the United States has
actually accomplished in the war?
Because right now, this is week six, and
I bet that a lot of people had either
assumed or understood that the United
States had destroyed a lot of Iran's
military capabilities that, as you've
said, seem to be working to some extent.
That's right. So you've got a military
campaign that by many measurements is
actually succeeding. The United States
military, along with Israel, has been
able to destroy or degrade much of
Iran's missile program, much if not most
of its drone program, its navy, and its
air force. But, two things can be true
here. You can still have a resilient
Iranian military that's able to pop off
missiles and drone when it wants, at the
same time where the American military
has badly degraded what the regime can
do long-term.
>> Mhm. But, the political goals, the
political strategic goals are not
necessarily on track. The president has
given contradictory explanations as to
what his end game really is here. And at
his news conference, even as he was
touting the success of this rescue
mission, he angrily lashed out and
threatened the Iranians to basically say
the entire country can be taken out in
one night, and that night might be
tomorrow night, basically threatening to
bomb bridges and power plants, and you
know, who knows what else if they don't
come to the bargaining table and have a
resolution to this by some time on
Tuesday night. That is such an
existential threat that he is making.
I feel like this rescue mission, this
victory that he just had, has almost
emboldened him in some way, just
listening to some of these threats.
Well, you know, it's it's interesting
because a lot of us thought that it
would actually chasten him. It would
kind of show him the risks of this kind
of military operation when the so much
of the success of it hinged on the
rescue or not of this one airman. But, I
think you're right, Rachel, that he has
basically taken this and said, "You know
what? This amazing American military
machine that I have, they can do just
about anything. And I'm going to take
this rescue operation, and I'm going to
double down now, and I'm going to
increase the threats and use this
bombing power that I have to go after
this infrastructure that supports not
just the military, but millions of
civilians across this country." These
power plants, for instance, are used
both by the military as well as just
regular civilians. And many legal
experts say this would be unlawful. This
would be against international law to
carry out these kind of strikes.
Before this plane went down, Eric, on
Friday, and this rescue mission
happened, so much of the reporting on
the war focused on whether there could
be some kind of an off-ramp. And I
wonder if both the United States and
Iran are claiming victory right now
after this rescue mission,
isn't that some path to an off-ramp?
It's possible, certainly. And listening
to President of the news conference, he
is still at least saying he wants a
diplomatic resolution to this. And in
fact, Iran on Monday submitted a new
10-point proposal that included terms
that would allow for
some kind of protocol for safe passage
through the Strait of Hormuz, but would
also include the lifting of sanctions
against Iran. Now, the Vice President
J.D. Vance is going to be traveling to
Europe late this week, so it's possible
he could be involved in meetings if
these negotiations were to get further
along, but much of this is still
unclear, and a lot of experts that we
talked to still believe that
negotiations are a long ways off.
So, where we stand right now is that the
president has set a deadline, as of now
it's Tuesday evening, for the Iranians
to either capitulate and accept a US
proposal for ceasefire, or face a
barrage of attacks on its
infrastructure.
How should we be thinking, Eric, about
where that leaves us in terms of what
stage of the conflict we are currently
in?
Well, I think if we were to be hopeful,
we could say maybe we're on the brink of
some kind of resolution where both sides
could try and claim something out of
this, but I think we're still a long
ways away on some of these key issues.
And the president seems to be moving in
the direction of escalation, of
threatening more bombing, even if it
takes days or weeks. The Iranian regime,
however, believes they're in the
driver's seat right now. They have the
leverage by still holding on to the
Strait of Hormuz, that economic
bottleneck that they have grabbed so
quickly, and by being able to shoot down
an American war plane by able to
continue to fire at energy
infrastructure around the region,
they've demonstrated that even though
they're badly degraded in terms of
military equipment, they still can
launch a punch every now and then. And
so I think both sides are hardening
their positions at a time when at least
the public rhetoric is to try and find
an off-ramp.
This rescue operation as we have
described it could not have been more
cinematic.
And also, it is coming at a time when
the administration is really struggling
I think to sell this war to an American
public that is looking at the gas pump
and seeing prices go up and up and up
and wondering, why are we doing this?
And so it feels like you could not have
handed the White House a better
narrative than this one, this
unbelievably heroic story that shows
American military might, ingenuity,
bravery
that as we said could have been ripped
from a movie.
I think that's right and I think the
White House and the Pentagon are going
to try and milk this for as long as they
can. The success of this operation is
cinematic and the rescue of an American
airman are dramatic, but in the end,
look at what you're left with. You're
still left with the Straits of Hormuz
closed, economic hardship throughout.
You're still left with a hardline
government that thinks it's winning, not
losing. And you're still left with this
fundamental problem of how do you deal
with this nearly thousand pounds of
highly enriched uranium that's buried
deep underneath the Isfahan site. And
what do you do with that? The president
said on Monday that that is still his
main goal is to prevent Iran from
obtaining a nuclear weapon, but he has
not laid out any of the objectives on
how you do that.
So even with the military success
overall and even with this very
successful rescue of these two airmen on
Friday, the administration is still left
with a lot of really difficult problems
to address.
Eric Schmidt, thank you so much. Thank
you.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Four astronauts on the Artemis 2
spacecraft made history on Monday
afternoon when they officially reached
the farthest distance from Earth that
human beings have ever traveled.
The astronauts passed 248,655
miles, the record set by the Apollo 13
mission in 1970. And they passed behind
the far side of the moon, seeing parts
of it never before observed with human
eyes.
And Welcome to today on this Monday
morning. We are so glad you started your
week with us and it is good to be home.
Yes, it is good to have you back at
home. Savannah Guthrie returned to the
Today show for the first time since the
disappearance of her mother Nancy in
February. Guthrie did not make explicit
references to her mother who police
believe was kidnapped from her home, but
she became emotional when she greeted
fans who waited for her outside of
Rockefeller Center.
These signs are so beautiful.
You guys have been so beautiful. I
received so many letters, so much
kindness to me and my whole family. We
feel it.
We feel your prayers. So, thank you so
much.
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nabethski and Rochelle Banja.
It was edited by Mark George with help
from Lisa Chow.
Research help from Susan Lee.
Contains music by Marion Lozano and Dan
Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.